hi my name is nick drumrate i lead both
product and design at loom i
definitely invite you all to let us know
where you are joining from i am joining
from san francisco this morning i have
my sidekick ollie sitting on the couch
which is my dog hopefully she won't bark
um but we are really excited to connect
this morning and i hope if you are still
early morning like us that you've had
some time to to grab coffee and with
that i will turn it over to justin
hey good morning afternoon evening folks
i'm justin i am calling in from vermont
where we are
just starting to get to the peak of
autumn fall color which i'm very excited
about i am the group product manager for
looms ecosystem pillar which is
responsible for building out our
platform and i've learned a lot of the
lessons i actually joined to loom as an
engineer and have now switched the
product side so it's been a really
fascinating set of learnings here that
i'm excited to share today
awesome and justin as people are are
signing on do you want to quickly tell
us how you got the nickname vegetables
yes so as i mentioned i used to be in
engineering previously at airbnb and at
airbnb it was extremely common for folks
to have custom slack handles especially
in engineering
and one of my team members had the slack
handle of beef which
is fine but as a vegetarian i got tired
of talking to beef all day
and decided you know what i need to take
a stand i'm going to switch to add
vegetables
which i thought would just stay on slack
but then people started calling me
vegetables in real life and a lot of
vegetable derived nicknames like
veggies but also really going out there
for things like v8 or maybe individual
vegetables like carrots or celery it
really became a whole thing and so when
i joined loom i took it with me and to
take it with me i needed to make it my
preferred name in the hr system so i
thought you know what
i'm going to change my twitter handle
i'm just going to make it a brand and so
now i'm now on vegetables reading
all right with that incredible factoid
let's get started um
so we have
released the loom sdk platform in the
last six months and so we are really
excited to share kind of some of our
hard lesson learned and also lessons
we've learned from other companies that
we really really admire
um we will begin by giving a little bit
of background information on on how we
think about platform as well as a little
bit about loom in our journey and why we
decided to expand from a b to b to c
successful product to expand into a bit
more of a platform in addition to
continuing our end consumer product
um i highly encourage everyone to chat
during the session justin and i already
spend a ton of time together so we'd
love to spend time with you and hear
your commentary and your questions we
also have a q a functionality um in zoom
so if you have any any any questions
please drop them in there and i will be
um staying on top of those questions
throughout the session
so with that i will turn it over to
justin
great thanks anik so as we're getting
started we're talking about platforms
platform plays what is a platform and
really
platforms are everywhere if you have a
sas product you're built on top of
platforms and you probably even have a
platform yourself it's just an internal
platform so a platform is just the
foundation for creating exposing your
experience to your to your customers and
users and platforms come in many
different forms there's apis which are
typically
invoked over the web with different
kinds of web apis whether rest or
graphql the protocol doesn't really
matter the key point is that you're
taking core functionality of your
product of your application and making
that functionality consumable or
interactable with partners and
ultimately your end users there's
packages of apis called sdks as well on
an sdk is really just trying to make for
the simplest possible implementation of
a more complicated surface area beneath
and a little bit more background to make
sure that that we're all accessing the
the session from the same level of
information i wanted to share a little
bit about what loom is as an end
consumer product because that is
ultimately what we are building our
platform off of and why our sdk has been
successful
so loom is a video messaging product for
work and what we think about every day
is how can we help people at work be
more effective more effect more
efficient and ultimately more expressive
we believe that video has an
unbelievable ability to help you connect
as a human and express yourself in the
workplace so i just want to quickly show
you the loom product because this is
really what what our partners in our end
developers are embedding in their
product through the sdk so this is the
core loom video messaging product oh
look even says express yourself i didn't
i didn't do that on purpose um but this
is the simple recorder that loom is
based off of and this is really how
people became familiar with loom as an
end consumer and what is being packaged
now through our sdks so if i were to
start a recording i would simply click
start a recording talk a little bit
about my screen and almost
instantaneously it would be recorded and
rendered and i'd be able to grab a link
and share it to justin and share it with
the group
so this is really loom
and so kind of our journey from this end
consumer product to our platform
began in 2016 when joe and vinay pivoted
their original company called open test
that was focused on user research to
loom which is who we are today
after witnessing the power of video at
work and they released the chrome
extension
from the chrome extension the the
product market fit of the product really
accelerated and loom recoursed its
its desktop recorders and also in 2018
released its embed sdk and uh the best
way to think about the embed sdk if i
open up notion today i can click a loom
and i can view it and i will be able to
react and leave comments as if i was in
loom.com
and then come 2019 where vast majority
of knowledge workers transitioned from
working in the office to working remote
we began to see a significant amount of
inbound
both from developers and also from
partners
to saying hey
i want loom in my product and i don't
want to build
video videos incredibly complex
technology how do i build a loom like
experience within my product without
having to invest in all that
foundational technology
fast forward in 2020 2021 we put a lot
of energy into building this and we
released the record sdk with 10 partners
including trello tranul and nero and so
this is really our journey
at the highest level from an end
consumer product to then
continuing to maintain that product
while expanding into more of a platform
and over here you can see some of my
favorite kind of tweets that we got as
inbound which is
basically people just asking for the
loom sdk um both the embed and the
record so first one is who's making the
version of loom that i can
integrate directly into my product via
an api
the next one is the first thing i did
when we decided we wanted to add video
recording to our platform was go look to
see if loom had an sdk so again it's
just really a great example of us
partnering with the market and getting a
ton of signal from the market that that
there was a fit and a demand for this
and so
now we are done with the background kind
of on what a platform is what's loom
what's the journey what does the sdk
experience look like
um and now we really just want to share
about some of the hard lessons we've
learned over over the last
year or so
and with that i will
begin with our first learning which is
timing is incredibly important and i
think one thing that that justin can
definitely attest to is when you're
you're going zero to one
you need absolute focus and if you're
not willing to create absolute focus
this will become a big distraction from
your core product team
so we would love to turn it over to you
on what you think
is the biggest driver to expanding into
a platform product market demand or
capacity
i see the polls coming in
we'll keep it open for about 10 more
seconds
i have to admit watching the results
update in real time is pretty exciting
who will win
all right i think we should go ahead and
end this
great so it looks like demand came in
first here well i've got great news for
everyone who answered
whether it was demand market or capacity
you're all right
because the fact is
the timing's not right to make the
plunge unless you have
all three
so
first market when you're thinking about
a platform
it's a different kind of market
evaluation than just your core product
you need to be thinking about the degree
to which this platform play is going to
be able to scale from both a business
and a product perspective so for us as
an example we're talking about video and
ben evans noted that video is in the
process of going into everything video
will just be a part of all products at
some point and so
the market here is as large as the
internet is this is truly a web scale
market when you think about something
like marketplaces
and stripe which is a very well known
and established platform but they didn't
start with a marketplace solution they
ended up adding a marketplace solution
after establishing some core financial
products as platforms and again
marketplaces as a concept
are massive everything can be a
marketplace so
when you're thinking about these kinds
of markets you're thinking about things
that have
internet scale opportunities and this is
for the business but it's also for the
product opportunity because you're going
to need to be building something
that is not just for end users it has to
be big enough for there to be a
community of partners
and developers who are building on top
of your platform and so there has to be
enough space for all of them to be
operating
and being successful within this market
and that connects really well with
demand so our partners already asking
for
this kind of platform-based
functionality and perhaps even more
importantly our customers asking for it
because even when you're building a
platform
who your customer is doesn't change
end users remain your customers
and yes they might be interacting with
your functionality via a platform
via a partner
but
you still need to be prioritizing their
engagement their happiness because if
customers aren't happy
your platform partners won't be happy
either and so you need to make sure that
you have demand on both the partner side
and the customer side we're going to be
talking a little bit more about the
partner side in a couple slides the
final point i want to make here is is
capacity so
for us with our platform we wanted to be
investing in it
much earlier than we
ended up actually making the investment
and
you know with the move to remote in
early 2020 with the pandemic
that was a
key driver in loom growth which at first
sounds like it would be a good thing for
lume but
it also came with some very significant
scaling challenges
um when you can imagine the number of
people going to try out loom all at once
definitely made
more than one database crisis
so
we needed to delay investment to
actually be at a point where we could
justify building an sdk building a
platform and so you have to be really
careful because you want it to be
painful you want it to be so early that
it costs you because if you wait until
it's cost-free you've waited too long
but you also don't want to make the move
so early that you're significantly
slowing down your core product so it's
definitely a balancing act and you can
probably never even across all of these
you'll probably never get the timing
exactly right there's
you will almost always be a little too
early or a little too late but that's
okay you just need to make sure that
you're keeping all of these factors in
mind
so
now you've made the decision to go in
you you're going to build a platform
and now that you've made that decision
you have to really go all in on this
this is not something that you can dip
your toe into you should be trying to
make a big splash with this effort and
one of the key things here is that this
is a
product like any other
and
like any other product discovery is a
core part of the process
so you're going to start
like with any other product by talking
to potential customers now the customers
that you're going to be talking to are a
little bit different because it's not
just your end users it's also the people
like anik mentioned who have reached out
to you on social or through partnership
channels or what have you saying hey i
really want to build on top of your
product i really want to have your
product functionality in my product um
let's see what we can do here and so
you're going to take that just like with
anything else and have interviews and
try to identify a key area of focus
and i think this can be something that
is an anti-pattern with platform plays
where people think that they need to
build stripe in the first go
and they don't you need to have
something that's definitely a minimum
lovable product here because
you already have a core product that you
don't want to damage in any way and
because it's a platform play the costs
of
poor quality or mistakes are higher than
normal it takes longer to recover from
them but at the same time you want to
make sure that you're solving for a
really core universal use case
and then you will learn from that and
expand from that and on the point of
learning you want to make sure that you
have at least one and ideally two to
three key partners who are so excited
for this that they want to be
co-builders so they're going to be
giving you feedback throughout the build
cycle they're going to be the first wave
of integrators actually building on top
of your platform functionality and
they're also going to be co-marketers
with you when you start to bring this
into the market they will be there to
share their success as a use case and to
amplify the messaging in your go to
market strategy
and justin shared a little bit about
kind of going zero to one with partners
i also think there is a in going to zero
to one the other side of it is to think
about who the team is that is really
building this product
um i think i shared this earlier but you
absolutely need a product design
engineering team that is only focused on
getting getting it zero to one they are
not maintaining the existing business
they are laser focused on getting your
platform out to market i think the other
like key ingredients that's flexible
that's sorry critical in terms of who
needs to build this product with you
you want them to be flexible and you
want them to be iterative because to
justin's point right you're building
this with partners and you want someone
who has an iterative approach that wants
to get in there with partners in making
sure that we are absolutely building the
right thing
i think in terms of who the product
manager is on this product ideally they
have two superpowers they are technical
so one of the reasons why justin moved
from engineering over to product is we
actually really needed someone who was a
creative problem solver both from a
business perspective and technically to
be leading this platform effort and then
i think the second key ingredient is
great at partnerships right the
traditional product manager loves
working with engineers designers and
then customers but when you're building
a platform like there's there's
additional um there's additional
stakeholders do you like interacting
with bd do you like working with other
ceos other product managers that don't
work at your company developers
engineers the number of stakeholders in
complexity just increases
and then i think one of our hard lessons
learned is we were really focused and
obsessed with building a singular
product team that was only building zero
to one and we should have done the exact
same thing on the product marketing go
to the market side of assembling like a
truly a team that was cross-functional
and and ready to build a startup within
a startup
all right and speaking of a-teams we
would love to hear about before we kind
of get into the people that we learned
from as we were building this product
we'd love to hear from you all what are
some of the world-class platforms that
you have seen and you have um really
looked up to and respected
so if you want to kind of throw in some
some companies in chat we would love to
hear who you all are looking up too
okay
all right justin i will turn it over to
you
great thanks anik and
people can feel free to keep adding some
examples here we see some great ones but
one of the the hard lessons here is the
importance of self-service
and the fact that nobody wants to talk
to you
i see in the answers we've got stripe
we've got twilio and
perhaps unsurprisingly of the
three examples that we're going to be
sharing here that's two of them so
stripe
consistently considered one of the best
platforms in the business from the
initial discovery on their marketing
page through
management of
any sort of implementation that you do
the entire journey is top-notch seamless
and
perhaps most importantly confidence
inducing so if you're going to be
building on top of a platform you want
to be fully confident that this platform
is going to be reliable that when
there's bugs discovered they will get
the the solutions for those bugs out
quickly you don't want to have to worry
about your platform because you have
enough other things to worry about right
and so stripe does an excellent job of
making people fully confident
in stripe as a platform before they
start building
twilio is a very similar thing they are
well known for having started with a
real developer first orientation the
famous talk to your developer billboard
sign campaign and their entire
experience is very much based around
this idea of
tight integration in marketing
documentation and code so
it's very clear as you're working
through
twilio and you're getting started and
you're experimenting with twilio
that it's it's you don't have to
actually talk to twilio to do very much
you can actually just spin up
a product on their platform without
needing to go through a conversational
cycle
and stitch is a is a brand new player so
it demonstrates that you don't have to
be a very established you know company
being around for a decade to do some of
these things stitch actually started in
2020 uh the co-founders were x-plaid
which is another fantastic example of a
platform but stitch is an authentication
platform and
what they do really uniquely is that in
their documentation they start with
templates in real examples before
actually getting to the apis themselves
so that it's really easy
to
learn how to use their products
before you invest a huge amount of time
and that balance of
learning without investing time
is the key thing here and it's why no
one wants to talk with you so
for a platform
operational the operational cost is
actually quite high on your end so you
need to ensure that there's strong
documentation you need to teach partners
what the use cases are so products
potential product managers who are
interested in building on top of your
platform want to know how do i integrate
this what are the use cases
business stakeholders want to understand
what's going to be the ramifications on
their
kpis engineers want to know how hard is
this going to be to build against what
are the capabilities
how can i
innovate with this and if you need to be
involved in all of those conversations
it's going to
crush you operationally because again
you're starting your platform with
ideally a tight tactical team and if
that team is spending an increasing
amount of time on operational concerns
instead of building the actual platform
you're not going to get enough speed to
actually kick off that platform flywheel
so ensuring that your platform is as
self-serve and well-documented and
frictionless as possible
not only is going to encourage partners
to build on top of your platform because
they're able to experiment it's going to
free up your team's capacity to focus on
building out new platform capabilities
and the final thing to note here across
all of those partner all of those
platform examples
quality has to be built in from the
beginning because the cost of a bug
is just significantly higher in a
platform play a
you may need to go through an upgrade
cycle through one or more degrees of
partners in order to get a fix out there
so
you have to think from the beginning
how do we build quality from
documentation to implementation to
observability across the board
so summing it all up and then we will
get to q a if we could go back in time
to sum up our hard lesson learns
i think like one thing to definitely
anticipate is that partnerships
discussions are lengthy and i think one
of the
the smartest things we did from a go to
market perspective was we focused on
really critical partners and getting
those successful
and just
know that it is going to be a bit
lengthy
um the second major learning if we could
go back in time is carve out go to
market resources in addition to your r d
resources because this is a totally new
motion for your company as you expand
from b to b to c to b to c plus platform
and then i think the other major thing
that i would say
is just lean into your beta community
not a way it may feel a little messy it
may feel a little overwhelming with so
many people in your slack instance etc
but these are your co-builders and you
want to hold that community really tight
all right so enough from us we would
love to get to a few of the q a that we
that we got in so justin i will let you
start off
um
[Music]
how did you go about building a case to
convince the c-suite to build an api
sdk that's a good question in our case
it's a little bit unique because i think
our our cto vinay was
perhaps actually advocating for this
even before we were ready to build it so
it might have been a little bit of an
inverse situation to say actually we're
not quite ready yet to build an api or
sdk as opposed to building a case to
convince um
in the other direction
it's it's the same as with anything else
you want to have data backing up your
argument here so this gets back to the
fact that your platform is a product
what's what are the indicators and what
have you found in your discovery process
that indicates that you have the scale
here you have the demand here and have
you right size to the investment to know
that you have the capacity as well so
what's the potential return on this how
much is it going to cost you and
try to be as fast with the initial build
as possible so again on that minimal
initial focused use case you want to
again get this into the market and learn
and iterate just as with any other
product
yeah and i'll just add my own opinion
here i think it it goes like the
beginning of our slides it's like what's
the total addressable market and what
are your signals that the market is
ready for this product
um
if i could boil it down to just two
things
um
justin this question is actually
especially uniquely you're uniquely
qualified for this one some developers
get scared at the complexity of building
api's sdks especially given the
uncertainty and ambiguity of unknown use
cases how did you overcome this and i'm
going to drop this in track because it
was a bit of a long question
it's a really great question and i do
think that this is universally true
because there is this perception among
engineers that
other engineers are going to be judging
their code right so when you're when you
join a company as an engineer you have
to get over the fact that new engineers
at your company will be evaluating what
you create but when you're putting code
into the market as a platform it feels
like contributing to open source so
there's a legitimate source of concern
there i think one way that we mitigated
against this was that we did have those
early partnerships and those
partnerships on co-building are not just
on the product or business side they're
also on the engineering side and so we
were able to have slack conversations
with partner engineers who were able to
give us really good feedback early on
before it went fully public and so it
felt much more collaborative it felt
much more like a team effort and that
really helped the team i will say that
building your initial zero to one
platform product is really really hard
and one mistake i think we made was that
we didn't recognize
how hard a lift it was on the edge team
and i think we could have done a better
job of encouraging all of them to take a
break and take some time off before the
next sort of one to ten push that will
inevitably follow up on a successful
zero to one launch
yep all right
next question what should the self serve
sign up process look like specifically
when do you decide to charge versus
uh offer it for free and how do you make
sure building on your platform has a
successful and speedy launch i'm gonna
take the free verse charge and then i
will turn it over to you for the
successful how do you measure a
successful and speedy launch i'm gonna
drop this question in chat just so
everyone can see it um
so in terms of when to give the product
for
for free versus paid
i think for us at loop right we have a
long history of offering our product to
free for users until a certain threshold
in which we charge them because we're
demonstrating
value
um and i think we've taken the exact
same approach to our sdk which is
we believe that video messaging
fundamentally is going to change the way
people work and give employees a ton of
power over their own day and we want the
ability for people to build that into
their own product so we are actually
starting with a fully free product there
may be next generations where it's you
know a paid sdk we are still exploring
that options um but i think for us we
really want to get our product out there
and we want it to be used and we are
confident that we can we can monetize as
we create that value for our partners
justin i don't know if there's anything
you want to add there but then share a
little bit about launch success
uh the only thing i'd added that is it's
just again just like anything else
what's your go-to-market strategy i
think the interesting thing with the
platform is that you do need to be
mindful of how it relates to your
overall product strategy so your your
go-to-market
involves both your core product market
offering and the platform offering and
you don't want to be too overeager with
trying to create a completely standalone
business even though you also want to be
thinking of how could this be a
standalone business right like how could
this revenue model operate independently
i the second part of this question is
great which is how do you make sure your
partners are being successful
essentially and
it's got to be built into your
observability from a product standpoint
so you should know
the time from when you enable the
partner to build to when they have their
first success without needing to talk to
them because if you have to continually
be asking them for how they're doing
again that operational cost is too high
so you should be able to have tracking
and observability that says this partner
reached out or connected or set up their
account on this day they had their first
successful integration on this day and
looking at volume looking at scale it
looks like they've rolled out to some
percentage of customers at a certain day
and then you can optimize for that and
that's one thing that we've been working
on it's how do we actually reduce the
time to first integration and then to
successful launch for the partner
all right we are going to do one more
question and then i think faster will
will kick us off this room
uh how established of a product in the
marketplace should you have before
moving towards becoming a platform i
have thoughts on this dresden but i will
let you begin
yeah i would say
you should very much have product market
fit here so if you're trying to create a
new platform play a new product where
you're trying to find product market fit
with it you don't want to be also trying
to find product market fit with your
core product offering you want to feel
comfortable in that you want to feel
some degree of comfort with the pricing
and packaging for that product and again
as we talked about before you want to
make sure that you can
carve resources away from that product
without killing velocity on the core
product
yeah i would just say it boils down to
do you have a high quality existing
product because you want to be fighting
to making like creating apis against a
product that's not ready for it so
quality is huge and i actually think
loom spent about nine months preparing
for the record sdk um so quality and
then i think it's ultimately
signal right do you have partners and
developers that want to build this with
you if you don't then you're not ready
and why rush yourself towards a
distraction and then i think the third
piece just building on top of what
justin said is do you have a team
that is big enough that can handle a
subset being carved out to go 01.
um i mean everything with product is is
prioritization and um
this is just another huge prioritization
question
so with that i will close this out
because i think
uh saster is definitely going to need us
to get off of this zoom so we don't make
anyone late for any other sessions at
the conference but i just want to thank
you all so so much i know we have people
joining from uzbekistan and mumbai one
of my favorite cities and so i just
wanted to say thank you all so so much
we really enjoyed preparing for the
session and thank you for all the
thoughtful questions please reach out to
justin and i
thank you so much that was great tons of
questions coming through i love the
chats blowing up you guys are really
engaging and interactive so we
appreciate that and yeah we've got tons
of sessions going on digitally we are
checking in for registration live in san
mateo so hope to see you all on a zoom
or in person